June 13, 2026

This is where I will be writing whatever I have understood from the book.

what a map of creating a language/implementation actually look like:

var average = (min+max)/2;

1. Scanning: lexical analysis/ lexing/ scanning.
    if a line of code is written. the scanner breaks it up into chunks (whitespace) and makes it easier for the compiler to read it.
    so the line of code would be:
    |var| |average| |=| |(| |min| |+| |max| |)| |/| |2| |;|
    each division is called a token. 
    Comments, whitespaces are ignored by the language.

2. Parsing: Basically distributes the tokens into trees (syntax trees, parse tree, abstract syntax trees, etc) So the trees are made
     entirely on preference and priority of the token. larger priority, deeper the node.

3. Static Analysis:
    binding. Takes an identifier and checks if it exists anywhere else in the code. Checks if its a global or local variable (scope).
    It also checks the type of the identifier if it matches or not. If not, throws a type error.
    But this is all done when the code is fully written and run. This is basically done by the compiler.

so whatever analysis is made gets stored as attributes(nodes) of the syntax tree. and whatever cannot be stored(no direct relation but
still related to the nodes in some way) is stored on the side to lookup. In this table, only identifiers and variable names are stored.
This table is called the symbol table. They essentially hold keys whose values tell us what those identifiers do.

This whole table is stored into an entirely new data structure.

Few more things I learnt:
    Intermediate representation: acts basically like an API. it has all the ways the code written by a user needs to be represented so that the
    memory can be managed properly.

    Control Flow Graph(CFG) - after the programmer writes the code. The compiler breaks the code and builds the maps the way its supposed to be exec.

    Static single assignment(SSA) - This is written inside the CFG. rewrites user-used variables multiple times so that variable names are used exactly once. so the names of the
    variables are changed everytime when they attain a new value as version numbers so that the compiler can bind properly.

    Continuation-passing style(CPS) - instead of returning/calling functions to/in other functions, functions naturally are called with a continuation
    as parameters. these "continuation" have the rest of the code in them so that the call stack never goes up a level and finishes off everything in 
    the same level. The call stack is reduced, however the heap memory is the one that's heavy since the "called" part is huge. Modern languages
    are modified to better manage these heaps.



June 14, 2026
    Python, Java have Virtual machines of their own to actually compile their code. So what and why this is done is:
    
    There are so many kinds of chips/processors in the world. Intel, AMD famous once and their own versions. in that there are ARMs and x86 architecture
    machines. 

    A code generator(converts the flat stack of code into machine language) essentially converts all higher level code into machine language, and as 
    surprising as it may seem, there are many machines in the world.

    So instead of creating a build-specific code generator, the compiler just has a virtual machine (eg. Python virtual machine or Java virtual machine)
    and generates bytecode in that. bytecode is similar to machine language but not the same.

    so since the language is read by the virtual machine, language hackers dont have to create a machine language creater for all the builds.
    These kind of virtual machines are called language virtual machines.

Different types of compilers: There are different kinds of compilers. in the 80s, memory was too precious to use up so much during code compiling,
so they used shortcuts and alternative paths to maintain minimal usage of memory while still executing code.

    Single-Pass Compiler: A fast, low-memory compiler that reads source code text sequentially from top to bottom and generates output immediately
    in one single go, without saving an intermediate syntax tree in memory. (This is why languages like C force you to use forward declarations,
    so the compiler knows what a function looks like before it hits the line calling it)


    Tree-Walk Compiler/Interpreter: A simple, high-memory engine that parses source code into a hierarchical Abstract Syntax Tree (AST), then
    executes the program by literally walking through the branches of that tree node-by-node at runtime.

    Transpiler (Source-to-Source Compiler): A translator that converts source code from one high-level language into another high-level language
    (like TypeScript to JavaScript, or Python to C), rather than down to low-level bytecode or machine language.

    Just-In-Time (JIT) Compiler: A dynamic optimization engine inside a Virtual Machine that monitors running bytecode, identifies the most
    frequently executed loops or functions ("hot spots"), and compiles them on the fly into native machine code to achieve near-C speeds while
    the program is running. Not used by languages to get them compiled because excessive memory is used, startup delays, highly complex to build.

compiling: Translating a source language into a completely different form.

    Compiler: Translates your source code into a new form but does not run it. The user must take that output and execute it manually
    (e.g., GCC or Clang for C).
    
    Interpreter: Takes your raw source code and executes it immediately on the fly. The program runs directly "from source"
    (e.g., early versions of Ruby).

    Gray Area (Like CPython)The Mix: Many modern tools do both at the same time.How Python Works: From the user's perspective,
    CPython is an interpreter because you run your program straight from the raw source text.Under the Hood:
    CPython contains a compiler that instantly translates that source text into an internal bytecode format before the VM executes it.
    The Verdict: CPython is an interpreter that uses a compiler inside it.

operators and operands. Operands are the terms which will be added/subtracted/operated using opertors. Operators are the ones that actually tell 
    what kind of operation should happend between two identifiers.

    a +(/)*(/)-(/)/ b are all called infix operators as all expressions have operators between the operands.
    a++ / a-- both are postfix where the operation is done after the operand.
    ++a / --a both are prefix where the operation is done before the operand.
    condition ? thenArm : elseArm ternary operator. also called mixfix.

Bytecode and what it does?
All languages even though they are written in a language you know that they need to be translated to machine understandable language. That work is done by compiler.
c and c++(older legacy languages basically) have compilers that convert their language directly to machine language. That is why they compile super fast.
Machine language is called Assembly. However, now it is very hard to make a language that is as fast because they are so many chips(hardware).
There is amd, intel, snapdragon, etc. So machine assembly language is different for each chip. If you create a language now like C, you will have to write a
different compiler for each chip set. So instead modern languages like Python and Java use soemthing called virtual machines(PVM and JVM).
These languages' compilers, instead of converting language to assembly, open their own virtual machines(which also is coded in a language similar to assembly).
Its called Bytecode. Assembly : physical chip :: bytecode : virtual machines. Each command for this VM takes up only one byte, hence the name.
This eliminates the need to convert each language into machine language of each chip set.
When you write code and hit run. All the code is first converted into Bytecode the VM can understand(process known as code generation),
and then runs the code in that VM environment.

Each line of the bytecode is one byte as told before, it also is called operation code or opcode


so chunk is a sequence of a bytecode. It is just a dyamic array of bytes that holds an instruction or an operand.
    return 1
    return is the instruction. 1 is the operand.

so for this we have chosen initial size of array as 8. Initially the array is empty and holds nothing. as and when instructions
are passed, the count of bytes in the array grows. when size of array is 1 less then than the current index of the array, that is
when grow capacity is triggered. It basically grows the max size of the array whenever it is triggered. Then there comes grow array
it actually reallocates all the elements from the old array to the new bigger array, and so the array is ever growing.

built a disassembler. Basically translates bytecode back into human readable format. This is mainly used by the VM author to understand what his bytecode-converted code
actually does. Basically you init a chunk with an OP_CODE. this op code is the resultant of another action.

so I will start from the innermost function
simpleInstruction initially prints whatever name is passed into it and increases offset(index) bye one.
disassembleInstruction first prints the offset (index), since its zero indexed array.
and then accesses the element at offset from the code array of the chunk and then compares with enum elements and  for time being we have passed OP_RETURN into
simpleInstruction to check how it works and then the offset so we see the OP_RETURN text. and for now if it doesn't match, it will give unknown code display
I think OP_RETURN here in the code initially has 0000 as offset because it is the only one declared in enum for now.